---
title: Justification
---
Simply means to “declare righteous.” The Scriptures speak of this declaration taking place in at least three ways:
1. **Justification by the Blood and Righteousness of Jesus Christ:** Through Jesus Christ’s sacrifice, God sees his elect as righteous, not counting their sins against them (Romans 4:6–8; Romans 5:8–10; 2 Corinthians 5:19–21; Hebrews 1:3; 9:26; 10:14–18). This means they can not be condemned because Jesus died and rose again for them, making them right with God. This takes place without depending on the person’s actions (Romans 4:25; Romans 8:31–34).
2. **Justification by the means of faith:** This occurs when the righteousness of God proclaimed in the Gospel is revealed to the elect sinner through God-given faith (Romans 1:16–17). Romans 4 explains justification by faith in terms of the elect sinner who ceases from his dead works and believes upon God who justifies the ungodly (Romans 4:5), and this faith being counted to that sinner as righteousness (i.e as the token or evidence of righteousness). Justification by faith results in the sinner’s peace with God, and by faith he has access into the grace in which he presently stands as the result of Christ’s finished work on his behalf. By faith, the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts and we rejoice in hope of the glory of God (Roman 5:1–5). By faith we have the evidence and witness in ourselves that we are righteous for Christ’s sake (Hebrews 11:1–4) and receive cleansing by the blood of Christ in our conscience (Hebrews 9:14; 10:22). This is justification, or God declaring the sinner righteous, TO THE SINNER HIS OR HERSELF, in the courtroom of their conscience. It is the sentence of justification as it terminates within the mind and experience of the individual believer.
3. **Justification which takes place by works:** This justification is evidential, rather than soteriological in nature, however. That is to say, this justification does not take place in the courtroom of heaven, nor in the courtroom of the believer’s conscience, but rather in the proverbial courtroom of other believers. This is what James chapter 2 deals with. A man may say that he has faith, but if he does not exercise his faith towards the love of his brethren, his faith is useless or “dead”, as James puts it. A man shows his faith by means of his works, and is thereby shown to be righteous before others (James 2:18–24). His claim to being a believer is “justified” or “vindicated” by his works, in other words.